README.md, before:

## Instructions

The following instructions have been created according to the documentation and updated: https://github.com/konveyor/kantra/blob/main/docs/rules-quickstart.md#writing-rules as some parts were not correct

To play with rulesets, add a new and test it, it is needed first to download and install the `kantra` CLI able to [analyze](https://github.com/konveyor/analyzer-lsp) an existing project and to generate an analysis report with issues able to guide the user towards the changes needed to migrate by example their Spring Boot application into a Quarkus one.

```shell
set VERSION v0.8.0-alpha.2
#set VERSION latest

cd distro
rm -rf {rulesets,static-report}
mkdir rulesets static-report
set ID $(podman create --name kantra-download quay.io/konveyor/kantra:$VERSION)
podman cp $ID:/usr/local/bin/darwin-kantra .
podman cp $ID:/usr/local/etc/maven.default.index .
podman cp $ID:/usr/bin/fernflower.jar .
podman cp $ID:/jdtls .
podman cp $ID:/usr/local/static-report .
podman rm kantra-download
mv darwin-kantra kantra
./kantra version
```
**Remark**: Due to a bug discovered since release `v0.8.0-alpha.2`, the `rulesets` folder must be empty - https://github.com/konveyor/kantra/issues/525

To test a new rule created, run the [testrunner](https://github.com/konveyor/kantra/blob/main/docs/testrunner.md#running-tests) and pass as parameter the path of the rule created
```shell
RUN_LOCAL=1 ./kantra test ../rules/coolstore/tests/rule.test.yaml
```

To analyze by example the `coolstore` project, execute this command and open the generated report
```shell
./kantra analyze --run-local --skip-static-report --enable-default-rulesets=false \
  -i ../rules/coolstore/tests/data \
  -o ../output \
  --rules ../rules/coolstore/rule.yaml \
  --overwrite
```
Check the `ouput.log` generated
```shell
cat ../output/analysis.log | grep "com.redhat.coolstore.service.ProductService"
time="2025-08-12T15:46:24+02:00" level=info msg="language server log" line="!MESSAGE KONVEYOR_LOG: got: 2 search matches for com.redhat.coolstore.service.ProductService location 12 matches2" provider=java
time="2025-08-12T15:46:24+02:00" level=info msg="Symbols retrieved" cap=referenced conditionInfo="{\"Referenced\":{\"Pattern\":\"com.redhat.coolstore.service.ProductService\",\"Location\":\"FIELD\",\"annotated\":{\"pattern\":\"javax.inject.Inject\"},\"Filepaths\":null}}" provider=java symbols=2
```

Commit message:

Parse the json report
Signed-off-by: cmoulliard <cmoulliard@redhat.com>

README.md, after:

## Instructions

The following instructions have been created according to the documentation and updated: https://github.com/konveyor/kantra/blob/main/docs/rules-quickstart.md#writing-rules as some parts were not correct

To play with rulesets, add a new and test it, it is needed first to download and install the `kantra` CLI able to [analyze](https://github.com/konveyor/analyzer-lsp) an existing project and to generate an analysis report with issues able to guide the user towards the changes needed to migrate by example their Spring Boot application into a Quarkus one.

```shell
set VERSION v0.8.0-alpha.2
#set VERSION latest

cd distro
rm -rf {rulesets,static-report}
mkdir rulesets static-report
set ID $(podman create --name kantra-download quay.io/konveyor/kantra:$VERSION)
podman cp $ID:/usr/local/bin/darwin-kantra .
podman cp $ID:/usr/local/etc/maven.default.index .
podman cp $ID:/usr/bin/fernflower.jar .
podman cp $ID:/jdtls .
podman cp $ID:/usr/local/static-report .
podman rm kantra-download
mv darwin-kantra kantra
./kantra version
```
**Remark**: Due to a bug discovered since release `v0.8.0-alpha.2`, the `rulesets` folder must be empty - https://github.com/konveyor/kantra/issues/525

To test a new rule created, run the [testrunner](https://github.com/konveyor/kantra/blob/main/docs/testrunner.md#running-tests) and pass as parameter the path of the rule created
```shell
pushd distro
RUN_LOCAL=1 ./kantra test ../rules/coolstore/tests/000-coolstore-rule.test.yaml
popd
```

To analyze the `coolstore` rule project, execute this command where you pass the name fo the rule folder like the text to search about within the generated report
```shell
./scripts/analyze-rule.sh coolstore 000-coolstore-rule "ProductService"
```
